THE DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY’S
FY14 BUDGET PROPOSAL ON NU-
CLEAR WASTE

The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
Chair recognizes the gentleman from
Illinois (Mr. SHIMKUS) for 5 minutes.

Mr. SHIMKUS. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to address the Department of En-
ergy’s budget proposal on nuclear
waste. It’s a joke—but as a representa-
tive of nuclear electricity consumers
and taxpayers, I don’t find it funny.

DOE Assistant Secretary Peter
Lyons says we should ‘‘cut our losses
and move on’’ from Yucca Mountain.
We’ve spent (5 billion on Yucca Moun-
tain, but this administration says we
should just give up and go try some-
where else, hoping some other State
will be a willing host. The DOE budget
proposes spending $5.6 billion over the
next 10 years to start over and maybe,
just maybe, have a permanent reposi-
tory by 2048.

The details provided for this new
plan are scant to say the least—14
pages. DOE proposes to abandon (5 bil-
lion and 30 years of work, start over,
create a new government entity to be
responsible, and find willing States to
host two interim storage facilities and
a repository—all within 14 pages. I con-
sider it brainstorming, not a plan. It’s
certainly not something that justifies
VerDate Mar 15 2010
01:09 Apr 19, 2013
H2031
CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
Jkt 079060
$5.6 billion. In addition, DOE has re-
peatedly stated the need for Congress
to pass legislation, but has yet to pro-
pose any. That shows the administra-
tion is not trying to solve this prob-
lem, just avoid it by pointing the fin-
ger at Congress.

Nuclear electricity consumers pay
for a permanent repository for spent
nuclear fuel. What would they get after
spending another 10 years and $5.6 bil-
lion? A pilot interim storage facility
with limited capacity.

    b 1020

A pilot facility? Dry cask storage,
the same technology that will be used
at the interim storage facility, is cur-
rently used at 65 locations. As for
transportation, the U.S. nuclear indus-
try has completed 3,000 shipments of
used nuclear fuel over 1.7 million miles
of roads and railroads. What’s the pur-
pose of having a pilot facility?

The only other pilot facility is the
Waste Isolation Pilot Plant in New
Mexico. I’ve been there, and it’s an im-
pressive facility. But that pilot project
became a permanent facility with a
10,000-year environmental standard.
Given that backdrop, does DOE really
think some unsuspecting State will ac-
tually fall for the idea that a pilot in-
terim storage facility will truly be
temporary?

But $5.6 billion doesn’t begin to ad-
dress the real costs hidden in this pro-
posal. Instead of merely paying for a
repository, nuclear electricity con-
sumers will now have to write off the
cost of abandoning the Yucca Moun-
tain site where we’ve spent (5 billion.
DOE’s previous estimates for transpor-
tation were (9 billion; so if DOE is
now going to have to transport it
twice, once to an interim storage and
then later to a repository, ratepayers
will be on the hook for an extra (9 bil-
lion. All this, plus the $5.6 billion in
the budget, equals {9.6 billion.

And that’s just the bill for nuclear
electricity consumers. Taxpayers will
continue to pay for the liability costs
of DOE’s failure to provide disposal.
That cost is [.6 billion so far and pro-
jected to be [0 billion by 2020. The
Government Accountability Office tells
us that it’s faster to finish Yucca
Mountain than to start over with in-
terim storage. Yet this administration
prefers to start over, disregarding the
cost to the taxpayer.

Electricity consumers and taxpayers
shouldn’t have to pay for President
Obama’s campaign promise to HARRY
REID, certainly not {9.6 billion worth.

Mr. Speaker, DOE’s proposal is a boon-
doggle at a time when our citizens can
least afford it. I, for one, am not laugh-
ing.

Mr. Speaker, as we remember the
tragic events of yesterday, we are re-
minded that there is sin and evil in the
world. We pray for Boston, our coun-
try, and the world, but the business of
the Republic must go on.
