SPECIAL IMMIGRANT VISAS
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
Chair recognizes the gentleman from
Oregon (Mr. BLUMENAUER) for 5 min-
utes.

Mr. BLUMENAUER. In the after-
math of the 10th anniversary of the war
in Iraq this spring, those of us who op-
pose the war, as those who thought it
justified, are all sorting through what
happened. More important, we are
united in our support for our men and
women in uniform who fought that he-
roic effort regardless of our feelings
about the war’s justification or his-
tory’s verdict.

We have an obligation to all those
who served to smooth their reentry and
to minimize the price they paid for
that war.

But there is another group who put
themselves at risk for the wars in Iraq
and Afghanistan. I am speaking of the
Iraqi and Afghan nationals who worked
with the American soldiers—thousands
who were shoulder to shoulder with our
troops, often in the most difficult of
circumstances. They provided services
as guides and interpreters that lit-
erally made the difference as to wheth-
er our soldiers lived or died.

I’ve talked to returning servicepeople
who made clear how important it was
that they had that help and how grate-
ful they were to the Iraqis and Afghans
who played those vital roles. I’ve
worked with some of those soldiers to
try and bring to America—to safety—
some of those people who worked with
them.

There is another group who knows
about their contributions—the hostile
elements still on the ground in Iraq
and Afghanistan. These are people with
long memories, who have vowed to
take retribution for what they felt was
an act of betrayal. Countless foreign
nationals who worked with us have
paid the price. They, along with mem-
bers of their families, have been at-
tacked, kidnapped, and killed.
We have an obligation to get them
out of harm’s way.

That is why I worked with my col-
leagues on both sides of the aisle and
on both sides of the Capitol in 2007 to
create a special immigration visa pro-
gram to enable them to come safely to
the United States. It’s a program not
just for Iraqis; but starting in 2008, it
was extended to Afghans as well—any-
one who faced an ongoing and serious
threat as a result of their employment
for and on behalf of the United States
Government. These two programs have
enabled us to save the lives of these
brave Iraqis and Afghans who often
were in the heaviest fighting and whose
contributions were most critical.
But we’re facing two serious prob-
lems:

One, the programs are set to expire—
for Iraq, September 30; for Afghanistan,
1 year later. Even more critically, we
need to make sure that the special im-
migration visas, the SIVs, that have al-
ready been authorized are utilized. The
processing has been incredibly slow.
Recently, joined by 18 of my col-
leagues of both parties, including six of
our colleagues who were veterans of
Iraq and Afghanistan, we urged the ad-
ministration to work with us to extend
and reform the visa program. Let’s cut
through the extensive paperwork, the
numerous agencies and timelines in-
volved with all the background checks,
provide the transparency to applicants
so they know where they’re at, and ad-
dress the adverse decisions by a chief of
missions so people have a chance to
correct the record.

Make no mistake—this is urgent.

Just yesterday, on the front page of
The New York Times, there was the
story about an Afghan interpreter
named Sulaiman, who has been work-
ing with us in Afghanistan for over a
decade in over 300 missions in highly
dangerous Special Operations assign-
ment. Over the course of the last few
years, the Taliban has attempted to
kill Sulaiman three times; but despite
his exemplary service and the extreme
threat to his life, that visa we created
is not functioning for him. After 2
years, he remains in limbo, with no
visa and the program set to expire.
Only 22 percent of the Iraqi visas and 12
percent of the Afghan visas have been
issued. These are ready to go.

Last fall, The Post reported that over
5,000 documentarily-complete Afghan
applications remained in a backlog. No
doubt, the past performance is abys-
mal, but we have an obligation to ex-
tend and reform the programs and to
make sure we give the resources nec-
essary to deal with the understandable
paperwork involved.

This bipartisan issue offers Members
of Congress and the administration the
chance to work together to save lives
and ensure the safety of our troops cur-
rently serving in harm’s way and fu-
ture missions abroad. Otherwise, no
one in their right mind is ever going to
cooperate with U.S. forces under these
circumstances.
